- If you're new to building computers,
one of the first little pieces of trivia
you'll probably come
across is that AMD CPUs
use pins on the bottom, while
Intel ones use little contact
pads with the pins on the
motherboard socket instead.
But why were these choices made?
Do the engineers at AMD just
think that pins are prettier?
Well, it turns out that
the use of pins versus pads
is a very deliberate design choice.
You see Intel's approach of
having pins on the motherboard
instead of the chip, called
a Land Grid Array or LGA,
typically makes it easier
to fit more contacts
into a smaller space on the CPU.
Modern CPUs need a lot of contacts
for their high speed
features and to promote
stable power delivery by
spreading out the current.
The other thought is
that because tiny pins
are very fragile, you know,
'cause they're super thin,
well, it would be better to
place those on the motherboard
rather than the CPU because
it's not uncommon to see
a $400 CPU installed
on a $150 motherboard.
So if one of those things was gonna break,
you'd rather it be the cheaper one right?
Then you can reuse that
CPU on a new motherboard.
Now of course, you can still
mess up an LGA processor
by touching the gold
contacts on the bottom
with your oily little fingers.
But overall, they are harder
to damage than pin grid array
or PGA chips, which are designed
to help improve your golf game.
No, sorry, just kidding.
PGA chips the ones favored
by AMD are the ones with pins
on their undersides and
compatible motherboards for those
have corresponding holes on their sockets.
Now, immediately, you
can probably figure out
that this makes PGA chips a
little bit easier to damage.
However, there are some
upsides to using this design
over a Land Grid Array,.
For one, the pins on PGA
chips are a little tougher
than the motherboard pins that
you'd see in an LGA socket,
meaning that they are easier
to repair in the event
that they do get bent which I'm sure
you can sympathize with
if you have ever had
the misfortune of having to re bend
even just one damaged pin
on an LGA motherboard.
The superior durability
of PGA pins means that
they can typically handle
a little more current
than LGA packages too,
which can be important
depending on how the
chip itself is designed.
And for another advantage
that you can more
readily experience firsthand when building
or upgrading your own
PC, PGA chips tend to be
a bit easier to install,
since there are no
super delicate motherboard
pins to worry about.
Though of course, you do
have to make sure that
you hit every hole in the socket properly.
These advantages have
led AMD to keep using PGA
for its consumer level
chips, even long after Intel
abandoned pins on their
desktop chips way back in 2004.
And even though current
3rd Gen rising processors
actually have more contacts on the bottom
than their Intel rivals,
AMD still found a way to fit
all those pins onto one package,
partly because the processors themselves
are physically larger.
Now as you might have figured
out LGA does allow you
to cram more contacts per unit of area.
So there actually are
AMD chips that do use it.
There are Threadripper lineup
for high end desktop PCs
and their epic lineup for
servers are both based on
land grid array designs
with over 4000 pins.
So if you're lucky enough to
be using one of those monsters,
definitely don't bend
any of those delicate
motherboard contacts.
As far as what all this means
for you the consumer though,
Well, nothing because you
shouldn't be choosing a CPU
based on whether it's PGA or LGA,
it doesn't really affect
performance in the way
that the architectural
design or the clock speeds
or the core counts that the chips do.
And the reason that Intel and
AMD went their separate ways
is just because they
valued different aspects
of these designs since each one
does have their pros and cons.
It's just important to
be aware of the pitfalls
whenever you're installing either of them
so you don't mess up
the bottom of your chip
unless you want very expensive coaster for
well your shot glass, wouldn't
be a very big coaster.
But this would be a big
segue to our sponsor.
What's in your online security toolkit?
Adding a VPN lets you mask
your IP and encrypt traffic
to and from your devices
and Private Internet Access
is a pretty great choice
for a reliable VPN
with over 3300 servers in 30 countries.
There are no bandwidth caps and PIA offers
configurable encryption
and an internet kill switch
to keep you in control of your connection.
PIA combined with private
browsing can make websites
think you're in a different country,
which can be useful for things like
getting better deals on flights,
at least once this whole
COVID thing has passed.
You can connect up to five
devices at once with clients
from multiple operating
systems and their MACE feature
blocks requests to known malware
and tracking domains
altogether, pretty sweet.
So check it out with a 30
day money back guarantee
at lmg.gg/piatechquickie,
we're gonna have that linked below.
Also down below is,
Ah, what else are we gonna have below?
Your comments which we will read and see
if you have video ideas for us
and then we will make those videos.
That's how this symbiotic
relationship works.
You want videos, we make
videos, everybody wins.